Laura Williams-Tracy is a writer and contributor to the SSA (Self Storage Association) magazine and has written extensively on industry’s trends and issues and could offer industry insight and data access. Web presence: http://www.ssaglobe.org/Industry-Report/Author/968, Email: laura@lwtcommunications.bz
Email interview March 21, 2018 

GM: To someone who is unfamiliar with this industry, how would you describe it? 
The self storage industry is made up of several large public REITs – CubeSmart, Extra Space Storage, Life Storage, National Storage Affiliates and the biggest, Public Storage, some regional players and then a whole bunch of mom and pops. There’s a lot of consolidation happening in the industry as the larger platforms offer 3rd party management to smaller operators. This is driven by the need to have a robust online presence since more and more tenant traffic comes from online searches. 

GM:What are the most compelling aspects of it?
LW: Self Storage outperformed every other major commercial real estate class during the recession and continued those gains after the recession. While not recession-proof, storage seems to be somewhat recession resistant. In bad economic times people need storage as they are losing jobs and moving homes, and in good times they need storage when they are buying new toys or moving for new jobs.  

GM:How was the industry changed since you started covering it? What are the biggest changes you’ve seen? 
LW:The growth of 3rd party management might be the biggest change. It’s harder and harder for a single store operator to make it if they don’t have a robust online presence. The top operators (those REITs mentioned earlier) have complex algorithms to set street rates for new rentals based on demand and other factor so they can really drive revenue. Plus, they have the ability to be at the top of any local online search for storage.
Another big trend is that self storage seems to be “saving” the dying retail industry. That’s a bit exaggerated, but there are a significant number of conversions happening. Developers are buying empty big box retail stores – think Kmarts, Sears, Toys R Us – and converting them to climate-controlled self storage. The projects tend to be in high-profile areas and lend themselves to quick and relatively easy conversion. 

GM:What are the most surprising trends you’ve noticed while covering the storage unit industry? What data do you find most surprising around the storage unit industry? 
LW: The most interesting story I think I’ve written lately about self storage is about how it is starting to fill that “last mile” need for ecommerce. Life Storage in Buffalo, NY, has built an intelligent warehousing subsidiary called Warehouse Anywhere to help business customers place and track inventory in more than 10,000 locations. Using self storage facilities, corporate customers can forward-deploy inventory, putting it closer to employees and customers than the traditional mega-warehouse, thus shortening the response time. It’s kind of like Amazon for self storage.

Storage unit business has seen impressive, consistent growth in the past 2 decades, what do you think are the main causes of this?
LW: The business is quite cash-generative. It’s a simple business that with the right technology can be quite successful. 

GM:What do you wish people knew about the storage unit industry? 
LW: It’s more complex that at first blush.

GM:How would you describe the typical storage unit owner? Are there a few main types?
LW: How often do customers go to their unit? What is the foot traffic of storage units like? 
I don’t know a lot off the top of my head about these questions. I do think most self storage is used by residential customers, but more and more business customers are using self storage. For example, pharmacy reps use self storage to store their samples and safely lock them up at night. 

GM:Though the industry is owned by different companies, they have a similar aesthetics, why do you think that’s the case?
LW: Perhaps this is related to getting zoning approval. Self storage is not adored by city councils and county commissions because it doesn’t generate a lot of employment or a lot of sales tax revenue. For that reason developers usually have to fight tooth and nail to get projects approved. If something works, they probably stick closely to those same principles on the next project. 


GM: There was a dip in Industry Value Added in 2017 according to IBIS world research report, why do you think that happened? 
LW: Not sure about this. I’d have to read up on the study. There was lots of money chasing self storage in 2015, 2016, 2017, including a lot of private equity money. The REITs pulled out of doing a lot of buying or developing and focused on gaining scale through 3rd party management. That might account for the dip, but like I said, I’m not specifically familiar with this measurement.

GM:Storage unit industry is set up for continued growth, what, if anything, could derail that? 
LW: The biggest concern in the industry is over supply. Almost no storage was built in the US between 2008 and 2013. Since then the industry has delivered lots of new supply across the board and in such markets as Denver, Nashville, Portland, Miami. The rate of new supply being added to the market is slowing and the new supply is being absorbed. There’s more data available than ever. Groups like Union Real Time have online development data bases that help developers understand their micro-market. Perhaps that’s helping developers make smarter decisions and not cannibalize each other’s businesses.  


GM: Industry ownership is fragmented, with 18% of facilities owned by the six largest public companies, 9% owned by the next top 100 operators (minus the REITs), and 73% owned by small operators. In a environment when larger corporations tend to take over smaller businesses, why do you think this is the case in the storage industry? 
LW: There are a variety of factors pushing this trend in self storage. First, the industry really got its start in the 1970s. Early owner operators of self storage in those days are now of retirement age and ready to sell. And lucky for them, valuations are high and there’s lots of money chasing deals, particularly storage facilities that are already full and may have some value-add opportunities. The 3rd party management trend mentioned before has contributed to consolidation. A small operator might choose to hire one of the big reits to manage their property and optimize revenue. The reit becomes familiar with the facility and its market so there’s a natural comfort level that leads to the reit eventually offering to buy the facility it is already managing. 

Despite the scale of their holdings, the big companies will never completely swallow up the mom-and-pop shops scattered across the country, why do you think that is? Do you see that changing? 
There are pretty low barriers to entry to get into the self storage industry. Given that dynamic, those with land, with building expertise and with an entrepreneurial spirit will likely always find pockets of opportunity. Self storage pretty much thrives or dies in a 3-mile market area. If you have lots of competition within 3 miles, that’s not good. But if you have lots of self storage in your city but not necessarily in your 3-mile market radius, you are probably in good shape. 

	
GM: The storage industry is now growing in Asia and world wide, why do you think that is?
LW: Smaller homes and apartments with a growing middle class creates the need or more space to store belongings.


GM: What factors influence the industry the most? Ie, economic, social, generational, etc
Lately it seems that real estate development trends are the biggest movers of the industry. As I said, occupancy tends to remain pretty steady in good economies and bad. When times are good, street rates (what they charge a new customer walking in the door) go up and developers start looking to build and open new facilities. 


GM:Do you use storage units? If so, why?
LW: I have in the past when I moved from one house to another, but I don’t have a need for an ongoing storage unit.

GM:What is the mindset of millennial customers versus older ones when it comes to storage units? 
LW: I hear that millennials don’t have the possessions that older generations had. Yet millennials are more likely to live in apartments and have very active lifestyles. I do often see self storage locations that are near places of outdoor recreation (Denver, for example) advertising themselves as a place to store outdoor activity equipment, such as snow boards, etc.

GM: When you tell people that you write about this business, are there any questions that people tend to ask you that I haven’t asked yet? 
LW: Unless people have noticed all of the self storage infill happening in their city, they do tend to still think of it as those squatty buildings out on the bypass around the city. I think they are surprised to hear about how much technology is behind the industry and its rental platforms. 

GM:How did you get into writing about the storage unit industry?
LW: The Self Storage Association was looking to add new writers to its monthly magazine and I happened to meet the editor at the time. I was already an established freelance writer.



