Erica Shatzer, editor of the quarterly Mobile Self-Storage Magazine and Self-Storage Now! magazine and associate editor for MiniCo’s other publications including the Mini-Storage Messenger and Self-Storage Almanac, would offer insight to pertinent trend within the industry and may have access to data sources i’m seeking. http://ministoragemessenger.blogspot.com/2010/04/erica-shatzer-named-editor-of-minicos.html

Interview March 22, 2018, 8PM 

Hi, Erica.

GM: How are you? 

ES: I'm doing well. Tha
nks. How are you? GM: Good! Thank you so much for making time for me. Is this time ok?
ES: Yup! 

GM: It's okay. I'm going to be recording this just so I can transcribe it later. Okay, great! Did you get a chance at all to look at the questions?

ES: Yeah, I printed them out and jotted down notes for them.

GM: Great! just a little bit about myself, I’m working on my final thesis for my MS in data visualization and I stumbled upon this topic of storage units and in sort of an uncanny way I was thinking about the Marie Kondo and minimalism and then I thought of consumerism and how has had had any affect. I saw these numbers about the storage self storage industry, and I found it really like interesting. It's just like how such a billion dollar industry and how it compares to other Industries in the US and how it compares to other each other places in the world, in Europe in particular. I haven’t figured out yet how I’m going to visualize it, so I’m trying to gather as much information now. So what I understand is that you you're the editor right now of the mobile self-storage magazine and self storage now? 

ES: So there’s several different ones, our Flagship magazine is a Mini Storage messenger and I am the editor of our quarterly Self Storage Canada magazine, Storage Now, as well as some of our annual Publications and sometimes we have random publications that we do. Like we have an RV Storage magazine that comes out once in awhile or Specialty Storage. I mean there's a lot of different aspects and components to it. So yeah, it's definitely a multi-faceted industry for sure. 

GM: For someone who is like unfamiliar with this industry, how would you describe that? I'm curious and I'm just trying to focus on self storage itself, but I want to make sure I'm focusing I guess on the right part of it and how that might differ from like RV storage and like public warehouse storage and what not. 

ES: In a general term, I would describe it as a real estate class that rents
Storage space and also provide services and sells retail and one major thing about self storage is that it outperforms all the other real estate classes. So investor point of view is a very lucrative business to get into because it's outperforming all the other real estate classes.

GM: and what are those? 
ES: Like so maybe like retail, multi-family hospitals, office, anything that would be a retail investment like so you could purchase this property and either rent it or own it but 
Based upon numbers and as far as like Financial growth and revenue growth self-storage outperforms all the other real estate classes. 

GM: And so what do you think are the most compelling aspects ?

ES: For me there’s several different compelling aspects. If you're looking at just like the business side of it the recession-resistant nature of self-storage. So and what I mean by that is like no matter what the economy is going through self- storage it thrives in good times and bad times.It's still making money because people need storage for various reasons. So then like a personal point of view like the people aspect of it, I find it interesting, you know, why people use storage and what they store it like that human element to it. And like from a design point of view, I find it interesting the conversions like right now there's a lot of big box stores being converted into self storage and I think it's interesting how they make that work and the new designs elements that they put into the facilities. And there's also a big push for technology right now and there's a lot of new technologies being put into the facilities that I find interesting and then from like business professional point of view, like everyone in the industry is just very open and helpful and there's even like the self-storage industry has its own like charity.
It's called charity storage that was founded by some of the industry professionals. And there's you know State associations to help people learn and grow within the industry. So there's like a big Network of just really great people. So all of those things I find compelling.

GM: How has the industry changed since you started covering yet? What are the biggest changes you think you've seen? 

ES: It’s changed a lot of different ways over the I mean, I've been wanting industry 11 and 1/2 years about and there's a push for consolidation which you mention in some of the questions later on but there's a lot of legal changes as well. I don't know how familiar you are.
with the statues, every state has different which self-storage operators have to follow in the event that there is a lien sale or an auction of a storage unit and there's a big push to update some of these outdated lien laws to make it easier for operators to follow the guidelines and there's a shift in the owners, who are the owner. You mentioned the kind of mom and pop owners and that's changing in regards to consolidation. So some of the larger operators out they are buying up some of the mom-and-pop operations. That's a big deal. And that’s continuing and has been continuing. There’s a lot of new technologies, like I mentioned a little bit ago. So that's really changing. There's a push towards Automation and then there's also a lot of new Services being offered like wine storage and Specialty Storage, so it’s changing in a lot of different ways and it's going to continue to change.

GM: When you describe the push and in how the states are handling the industry? Can you talk particularly, is that like a state by state push? Or is that like the storage unit asking or demanding a certain overall change in procedure.

ES: Each state has its own set of laws and while there are similarities they vary by state so that maybe like how much time an operator has from the time that a delinquent tenant stops paying till they can sell the unit auction. So it’s like an eviction process but for selling storage. And then there are like things that are self-storage operator has to do before they can sell that to make it legal. I'm so like they have to advertise the sale storage unit. 

GM: you mean for to auction off a storage unit that hasn't been paid for you mean? 

ES: yeah so, if a tenant stops paying for theirs unit after so many months of non-payment they can sell the contents of the unit via is a self storage auction or lien sale and.

GM: and like those laws are different states state by state? 

ES: yes, but there's a push to unify these so that almost every state will have the same laws. 

GM: regarding like auctions and eviction? 

ES: yeah

GM: why is that? 

ES: The reason is because a lot of our top operators or the reits, they operate in different states. So if you have I am a self-storage operator and I own 20 properties, but there in five different states. So now I have to know the lien laws and follow the lien laws and regulations for five different states. It can be a little bit cumbersome for the operators if each state has a different...

GM: like it’s too much to keep track off, so in some ways it could be a result of like the what you were just speaking of the consolidation of his mom and pops and then and these bigger companies taking over more so they're trying to make it, in some ways, easier for themselves as they consolidate more to deal with that. 

ES: and some of it is because times are changing and a lot of these laws are really old and so they don't take into account like online Auctions. They're not even mentioned. So that can come back on an operator if the lien law isn’t updated to you know what actually happened happening nowadays. Say they sell a unit online and that tenant, that former tenant comes back and says “wait a minute. No where does it say in the statue, does it say anything that that's legal? Well it doesn't say illegal either, but in an effort to protect themselves. You know cya, they want to make sure that they're updated so that they can send notification via email. Or they can send it via certified mail instead of some of these outdated and more costly means that aren't necessarily more effective. 

GM: have you heard of cases where people, where storage units industry or companies have gone into trouble regarding these laws? 

ES: There have been cases I'm sure that where people come back and say it wasn't.
Conducted properly.
And so then there's a lawsuit and that happens. 

GM: So a user might sue the storage owner or operator?

ES: correct, or a former tenant can sue a self storage unit or operator if they think that the sale wasn't conducted according to the law. 
Some states have to give three notices before they can sell. You have to make every effort to contact the tenant and there's a lot to that. 

GM: in regards to that, is there anything that you found super surprising? Is there a drastic difference between how New York might deal with something as opposed to, Nebraska.

ES: I can't think of anything off the top of my head, but I'm sure I can like dig through some of the legal articles that I've edited to see and get back to you on that. 

GM: I was just curious.

ES: yeah there’s a lot of different aspects and each one could be it’s own thesis, really. 

GM: What are the most surprising trends you've noticed while covering this industry? 

ES: Just like every other industry the technological drive, that's really surprising to me. I mean, I guess not really surprising so much is that the way it's being used and I mean, you know, we have self storage kiosks so similar to like the Redbox like people pack in rent a unit, get a lock, walk from a kiosk but now that's even changing where it now there's more automation where you can do all these things through your mobile phone or other device where you can rent, reserve, pay for unit. Sign an e-lease.
All these things and now that there's there's individual door locks that you can operate with your cell phone so you can open your self storage facility door
while you're coming down the road if you want. It’s like James Bond-ish, say you’re coming up to the facility and you want to make a fast trip, okay you’re opening your door
As your parking, you run in, get what you need and run out.

GM: i saw that like almost half of Self Storage users like kind of lock it up and kind of forget about it in a way, they're like long-term users. But when it becomes that accessible, i wonder it it kind of becomes spare closet for them in a way that they can continually go back to as opposed to just tucking away old family memorabilia for instance and not kind of seeing it for a long time. It sounds like it could extra stuff you actually are using but you’re using a different location because you don’t have room at home. 

ES: I think in urban areas that’s really the case. You asked about how often people go to their unit. And it really varies by the tenant and by the location as I just kind of mentioned. I think that places where there are the apartments, you know, a studio apartment is like $1,000 a month, but that's all they can afford. Those people are prime candidates for self storage and they may be going there every day. They may have most of their wardrobe there. They may have they may be using it kind of has a mini business and a lot of people are doing that nowadays, like it's almost like an entrepreneurial thing. So the foot traffic depends upon what the tenants using it for you but.

GM: is there any data around that is readily available? In terms of foot traffic in storage units for each location. 

ES: there’s a company called yardi Matrix, they might have some data about foot traffic. I don't have it, our self-storage Almanac talks about... I have a couple of charts that I could probably send you, a couple graphs that talk about how frequently tenants use their storage unit. I know I could send you a few of those.

GM: that would be the amazing. Thank you.

ES: some of it broken down by demographic, or by generation too. 

GM: is that for a number of units? 

ES: that would be based upon industry survey that was done by self storage association, called the Demand study. And it talks about and they don't break it down by facility size, but it's broken down by generation. So it'll have like data based upon Millennials, Baby Boomers,Gen X, and the golden knights which I think are the oldest generation. 

GM: That would be awesome. Thank you. 
ES: sure! 

GM: is there any other data that you that you find most surprising around the industry? Aside from I guess like the AI data that you're talking about and I guess like the changes in terms of architectural design looks, is there any other thing that you found surprising data wise?

ES: I guess I would just say like the percentage of individual owners because because of the cost to build new facility ground up, it can be in the millions, you know, and depending upon location it can be even greater than that. But yeah, there's still a lot of people who may be own one or two facilities and the nature of that family business

GM: oh so you’re saying how the industry is still very fraGMented You mean?

ES: yeah there’s been a lot of mean of consolidation, within the last decade there’s been a lot of consolidation, but most is that consolidation is taking place within the top Metropolitan statistical areas. So I'm talking like New York City, Los Angeles, the top NSAs
those are where a lot of the consolidation is occurring. But in rural locations, which would also be called tertiary markets, 
there isn't much consolidation because there's top operators and the REITs, they don't want to be in those markets cause they can't make as much. So they want to stick with the urban markets where they can have higher rental rates where they have customers who can afford to use self storage and they don't become delinquent tenants.
So yeah. 

GM: do you find in a way that there are more mom and pops in rural areas that are kind of holding on to their unit and in a way, is that like.

ES: There are more in rural areas because they're more family business. You know, they they just do it. Some of them as like a side business. They're not really the ones that are building the multimillion-dollar facilities. They might just have a few rows off the beaten path. Yeah, but they still just count as a self storage facility and they’re still included in those numbers because just like any other industry you have different classes, but would the REITs and the top operators, what they're looking for are the class A facilities, the ones that are.
You know either new or a few years old. They have great locations that are inside the top Metro, metropolitan areas and they have....Sometimes are operated by some of the top management companies. 

GM: So In those areas, it's like in a way they're not as like the market is also not as big I’m assuming too? 

ES: in the rural areas, yeah, the demand is is usually not as high for self-storage like for instance, I live in a rural community. Even though the town of Altoona is a bigger city in my County it still considered rural compared to Philadelphia. So here a lot of the single-family homes have attics, garages, basement. So the need for self storage… It maybe isn't as great. So the facility size in general is going to be smaller in this area compared to Philadelphia because there's less demand. So in Philadelphia you have a lot of apartment dwellers, perhaps. Who would utilize more self storage or maybe businesses, a lot of commercial real places that would utilize Self Storage perhaps or store excess inventory or what. A lot of a self-storage operators want commercial tenants because they're more long-term tenants and they know they're going to pay, they can get a higher rate.
So all those sort of things factor in. 

GM: we talked about this a little bit before, the industry has just seen such impressive growth, especially in the last like decade. What do you think are the main causes of this? 

ES: people have more stuff. I just wrote an article recently about this, sort of. The demand increases because people have more things to store and less space to store it in. Even in the the areas where there are new Condominiums and new apartment complexes being constructed. The average size of each individual unit is shrinking and so people have less space, physically have less space to store things. In a single-family home environment like my home, for example, I converted part of my basement into a playroom. So the rise of these do it yourself and fix it up shows where people are trying to increase her actual living size or living space and convert it into other things. I mean, the list is from a home gym, to a den, to a man cave whatever the case may be, they want to use those atticsc basements, garages for other things. So when that happens. They need a place to store before
they decided to make it into something else. That's what's causing.

GM: I can see that I think there was a New York Times article recently too that was talking about like how the average size of a home has just like has decreased essentially and so it kind of ties to that. People are re-conceiving the space of what a house should be, but they still have to put their stuff somewhere.

ES: exactly 

GM: what do you wish people knew about this industry? 

ES: There's two main things that I guess I would say number one just because you can build a self storage facility doesn't mean you should. 

GM: (laughs) Why do you say that?

ES: because Demand, supply and demand is a balancing act and
The last boom cycle that we had in build like new build a new development. There was way too many. Demand couldn’t meet Supply. So there was a really large push of new Supply and then 

It affected the entire industry because there wasn't enough demand to meet that new Supply. 
GM: Was this in 2017?

ES: no this was precious, this was probably before the recession. 
There used to be a happening in this whole Field of Dreams thing that people used to always say if you build it, they will come. And that changed because there was so much new supply and it impacted the occupancies and rental rates of the existing facilities and then everybody suffered. 
That's the main thing because that has a really big impact on the industry. And the other thing is that I guess to try and change perspective of potential customers. There aren't really nearly as many break-ins and occurring at self storage facilities as you may think. 
I write about this all the time and there are a lot of oddball cases that come up.
But really when you think about just how many storage facilities there are in the nation and how many units there are in the nation. There are over 50,000 self storage facilities in the United States. So when you think about it is really rare that something bad happens. So it's safe, it’s lot a lot safer than people think to use. 

GM: do you know the percentage of break-ins that occur? 

ES: don't know and I don't know.I really don't know where, if there's anywhere that has like a nationwide database of just Self Storage break-ins.

GM: you talked about that just because people can build it, doesn’t mean they should. Like do you think people should and, I’m kind of curious in that it seems like you’re kind of warning against a building too many right? So where do you see the industry kind of going in that way instead? 

ES: Pretty, much every self-storage professional I've ever interviewed their advice is always to do your due diligence before you decide buy or to build a new self storage facility. You need to do your market research. You need to know what the supply-demand ratio is, if building a new facility there will tip that ratio in an unfavorable manner then you don't want to build it. But if there is a ton of supply and not much demand, for instance.
Within the city limits of Los Angeles,
There's a lot of demand but not a lot of supply and that's because of building regulations in that area in within the city limits. They don't want self Storage built there.

GM: Why is that? 

ES: Various reasons. A lot of places, a lot of cities want businesses that produce a lot of sales tax because they want that Revenue and income tax. So self-storage doesn't really employ a lot of people. An individual self storage facility you may only have a handful of employees. So there's that, so you're not creating a lot of job growth for the are. And you know, there's the real estate retail taxes and sales taxes where a shopping mall bring in more money for the city.
They also have a negative stiGMa.
There’s a you know about like I said the break-ins and a lot of the illegal activities that come about. So for those reasons, they're kind of hesitant to allow a new facility to be built within the city limits. The people in that area, they go outside of the city limits to other areas that have self storage facilities to store their stuffs 

GM: Is any way to get like rules and regulations are for each city of like what what a storage has to have to build there? I’m curious how that may be different for say Los Angeles versus like Austin.

ES: there’s no one place to get all of that information. What you would have to do is look at the planning committees and zoning communities of each area that you're looking to compare.
Every municipality has different zoning and building regulations. So really there's no way to...
There's no one place to find all the information for every municipality. 

GM: How would you describe the typical storage unit owner? Are there a few main types? 

ES: There are several. We mentioned the mom and pops. It might be an individual or it might be a family business. Then there's also like private Equity investors, that may include what we call home offices. So say like...
The Walmart family, the Walton family, they invest in Self Storage.
So that's like what we consider a home office. So say they have they have lots of investment money. They invest in Self Storage.
And there's also the REITs which we call the Real Estate Investment Trust, that’s like the Public Storage, Extra Space Storage Smart Cube Smart Life Storage, which was formerly Sovereign and they had, they were operating under the brand name Uncle Bob's Storage, but they changed their name to Life Storage and then there's also...
National Storage Affiliates or what we call NSA. So those are the different kinds of owners, those are the public companies, the REITs. 

GM: So the REITs are the public owners and then you have your Mom and Pop's, which are sort of individual ones. And then you have your investors in the way? You mentioned? 

ES: And you have what I call large operators. There are our top operators. Every year we produce a list of the top 100 self-storage operators in the country and some of them are management companies and some of them are just owners.
There's so many different. 

GM: So if were to break them up into different groups, there would be the REITs (CubeSmart and Public Storage) right? And then you have your Mom and Pop's. Where does the Walmart investment group fit in? 

ES: So they’re private equity investors. But they could also be one of the top operators, it just depends upon how much they want to invest in Self Storage. 

GM: So do they have their own units or do they invest in something like Public Storage or something? 

ES: They might decide to purchase like 20 self storage facilities.
Just depends upon how much money they want to put into the industry. There’s this show Dynasty, have you ever seen or heard of it? 

GM: I’ve heard of it but never seen it. 

ES: So that based on the Rosewood family
Or company trust, Family Trust or whatever it is, but they own self storage. So it's something like that, like a high net worth family that they want to put some of their investment dollars into a real estate business.
Well they decide upon self storage because it's recession resistant. It has low overhead cost. It's bringing in high-revenue. 
GM: So when they invest in it is like a stock option for them? How do they invest in it? 

ES: if could be, for a stock option then they would be investing in one of the real estate companies. There are the trusts, the top, those REITs, but for a lot of them they decide to to build or acquire existing facilities. They create their own portfolio. They’re looking to create a real estate portfolio to 
Protect their...
Finances and invest and make more money. 

GM: So they’ll buy other units or make their own? Do they make it under a different name? Like do they have a name, like for Walmart for instance do they have a different name? 

ES: I’m not sure what name they go by. Sometimes if they buy an existing, they’ll have a name and so they might decide to keep that name or they might decide to hire a third-party management company. Which case that that company might have their own branding. So for example Extra Space Storage...they do their own third-party management.
So you can hire them to manage your facility. But if you do they want you to use their branding and you'll want to use our branding for various reasons because of the notoriety of them, you know, because…

GM: they're recognizable and people might trust them already 

ES: uuhh huh, so some of them might do that and go that route. Where they still own the stake in the company, but they pay them to manage it.

GM: How do you break down the demographics of the owners? What do you think they have in common?

ES: What they have in common is that they own self storage facilities (laughs) and that they have the money to own them. That's really it that I can think of. I mean like demographics, it varies because. You know, you can have....You can have people who are an owner of it because a family member passed it on to them. So that's what a lot of the business aspects of it is. So someone in a family, they either buy or build a self storage facility, when they are set to retire instead of selling it, they'll pass it on to the next generation. So the self-storage industry has a lot of companies like that. StorageMart is one of the top operators that is also a family-owned business and they are great about that. You know, they....Pretty much everyone in that family has a different job. Like from marketing to Acquisitions to Property Management. They all you know. It's a family-run business, but it's also a top operator. 

GM: I was surprised to see that the industry is so big yet so much of it is owned by Mom and Pop's. 

ES: And that’s changing, like I said earlier, you know, there is some consolidation but most of the consolidation is within the top MSAs and now somewhat in the secondary market. So some of the secondary markets are becoming
Much more of a target for the the larger companies and their REITs because they recognize that there's a shift going on. 

GM: What what do you mean by MSA? 

ES: Metropolitan statistical area. 

GM: and the Secondary Market again?

ES: the secondary market would be for instance Chattanooga, Tennessee. That’s one of the bigger secondary markets, Tampa, Florida. 

GM: Like emerging sort of cities? 

ES: Yeah, people that are in the top MSA are moving to these secondary markets to enjoy better cost of living and also there's job growth that’s now happening within those secondary markets. So they're moving to these secondary markets and.
You know, everybody notices these trends like that, the migration tends, and so now the REITs and the larger operators are starting to acquire more facilities within those secondary markets and/or build within those markets.

GM: I noticed that a lot of the aesthetics of these units, even though they are owned by different companies, sort of kind of look alike. Why do you think that’s the cases? I understand that changing, but at first glance so much of them kind of have a similar aesthetic.

ES: it is changing some but I think it's basically because there's no need to reinvent the wheel. I mean they’re all renting a square, an empty Square basically with a door and so while the size varies, the products the same so really. Unless you want to spend a lot of money to make it look like the Ritz. Some places that is necessary, in upscale areas if you want people to, the upscale people, to rent at your facility. It has to look upscale. So you're going to put in a lot of money to make it look like that and in that regard they do look different because if you're going into a room where they're all single story drive up units. You know, that's not going to cost you a lot of money to build. But if you have to if you have to build in one of the larger cities and you're looking for an infill location and what I mean by that is...Land is scarce in big cities and so they'll take a conversion project usually. An existing building maybe not necessarily Self Storage, but they'll turn it into self storage. And so those buildings usually look different and unique because..
You're fitting....the piece is already there, but you're just styling it and formatting it to become self storage so that can be unique in that way. 

GM: the industry is pretty much set up for continued growth. Do you think anything could derail that?

ES: Too much new supply as I mentioned earlier, and also if there was a major cultural shift
towards the minimalism. 

GM: That was what I was kind of wondering, like would Marie Kondo effect this? So far it seems not the case that you know? Or do do you think it’s just too soon to tell? 

ES: It would have to be like pretty much everyone, you know, because they're still the older generation that wants to hold on to the family heirlooms, that wants to keep all those things to pass on to the next generation. But there's a lot of controversy on whether or not Millennials will get rid of that stuff or hold on to that stuff. That's kind of, it’s too soon to say really what will happen.
But a lot of people believe that once they Millennials have higher income brackets then maybe totally do away with that whole minimalism lifestyle. Like once they have money they’ll buy things, but I don't know. They are buying things now. Millennial do but things, but they buy different things. You know, they might not be into that antiques, but they're into sport equipment.
They need a place to store their kayaks, their bicycles, their whatever, you know.

GM: That makes sense.

ES: If they're not married yet and they're living in an urban area. They might not have space in their apartment for those things. So there's still using storage just for a different reason.

GM: That makes sense. I can see that because my first approach to this project was around how Marie kondo and minimalism will affect it but so far no and I think I think it's probably because of what you had said it was like the housing is also getting smaller and so it’s kind of reacting to that and perhaps offsetting that trend in a way. Or helping to. 

GM: we talked about how the
Mom and pops haven't been completely swallowed a big companies yet. Do you see a drastic change in that in the next couple years or do you think they will be kind of a slower change? 

ES: A lot of it's already happened. Like I said within the major markets and pretty much that's already happened, the consolidation there, now consolidation will start happening more so in the secondary markets, and then once all of that has been.
You know bought up, I don't know how much it will spread into the tertiary or rural markets because like I said the larger operators they want to be in the big markets. They aren't really interested in.

GM: like the rural makers? 

ES: Yes, So there will always be some mom-and-pop operators, but they're not going to be within the the major metros. 

GM: Do you know there's data on like breaking down the the kinds of storage units and their locations somewhere. Like for instance when you talk about secondary markets and like the ones in the rural areas, is there like a set of names of those locations, or where they are and under that group? 

ES: yeah, I can look through my self-storage Almanac which is broken down by regions, and I'll see what I can find and send it to you.

GM: thank you! I saw that the industry's growing in Asian and worldwide. Why do you think that is? 

ES: It's for the same reasons as here. People are buying more things and have less place within their home to store it. And from what I understand and what I've read the the living cost in a lot of the cities within the Asian countries are astronomical. The apartments are very small. I mean they even rent out what they call like coffin-sized Apartments. Have you ever seen? They look like dresser drawers or coffins and so when you have that and those things cost a good bit even at that size to rent then you're going to have a need for storage because people people have stuff. And a lot of Asian cultures, I think that at least with some of the older Generations in Asian cultures, they're hesitant to to get rid of things.I'm not saying that they're hoarders, but they keep things that they think that they can reuse. For instance, like anything that they consider reusable. I remember reading an article about someone starting a new facility in like Hong Kong or Taiwan, but either way, the people were storing like emptied and cleaned out.
Yogurt cups. Because they're like we could use it for like paints or something like that. Like the possibilities. My phone is dying.
They think they can reuse them so they store them now in storage. So they pay to store something that something in the United States we consider disposable.

GM: What factors you can influence an industry the most right now? Or in general? Economic, social generational?

ES: In which in which way do you mean? 

GM: I mean influence the growth and stability of it. What are they most dependent on? 

ES: The key demand drivers for self-storage, they’re all life related. So like job growth drives demand and migration where people are moving drives demand, but also like the life things like divorces, marriages, deaths, births. People going to school, people going to the military. Basically any transition in your life. So if you're looking to sell your home, then you might be using storage to to declutter your space. 

GM: As you like try to sell it or something. That part is what I find so fascinating in a way that like self storage is like something that's like everyone seems to kind of have to touch, that Americans have to touch at some point in their life as they evolve, but it's interesting to me that that's kind of unique American thing. You don't see that much in Europe for instance part.
So it’s part of this kind the American experience so it’s kind of fascinating why that’s the case. 

ES: Yeah, sometimes it’s like you lose a job so you need to use storage because you know, you have to move into a smaller house or are you get a new job and you have to use storage because you have to move to a new location for that job or you're going to move into a bigger place. Yeah, or you getting married and now you have his and hers so you need a place to store all of the Star Wars memorabilia that you don’t want in your house. 
There’s so many things, really, so many
Different things that drive demand for storage. 

GM: what do you think are the most common things that people are putting in their storage units? 
ES: from the data that has been collected in the NSA, study, which I can send you..

GM: I would love that! 

ES: Yeah, pretty much the top stuff is furniture, household goods, and clothing. And on the flip side of that the strangest or most surprising things people put in storage usually end up . basically all the illegal stuff that they're not supposed to be storing becomes like the most surprising thing like units have people have uncovered deep freezers with dead bodies in them. I mean wow everyday, but yeah.
If there's a lot of really weird things that I've written about that have been found you not I am fortunate enough to live in a home where I have a garage a basement and an attic I don't right now I have used storage in the past when I've moved cross-country from Arizona back to Pennsylvania. I had a storage a mobile storage unit.
For a while. 

GM: What do you think the mindset of millennial customers versus older ones are when it comes storage units? In terms of space and also lifestyle, then older units I’m asssuming would be more like their old like memorabilia and things like that.

ES: I think when it comes to Millennial customers, younger customers versus older customers, the main difference really that we are seeing is the that they the younger customers are more tech driven, they want, you know, they want mobile-friendly websites. They want the mobile access to their units. They want just a facility that has an led offers more Tech related products and services: smart locks for the door or the like individual door alarms that are mobile operated. Things like that and like I said earlier, the differences is in the things that they store. And sometimes we've seen, with like Millennials or younger renters that there are entrepreneurial uses for storage. Some might use it a storage unit for band practice, or a man cave, you know. Like I said, they need a place to store all their Star Wars stuff, it’s kind of half a joke, but really it's true. There are young couples where the wife is like “no, I don’t want that in the house.” So the guy rents a unit and he has a little hangout place. They have their own man cave at a self storage. So yeah, that's the difference. (laughs)

GM: The industry is set for project continued growth, so you agree with those numbers? 

ES: From everyone that I've talked to an interview. It's it's going to keep going and it's going to keep it over to remain strong as long as people keep their heads on their shoulders right now. Not over build, not saturate the markets, not fall into that slippery slope that
happens with rental rates because sometimes though they think that in order to compete they have to lower their rates below the competition and that's not good for anyone. Nobody makes a living that way. So as long as people, you know, stay on track and
what we say in the industry like you don't give the farm away, like don't sell the farm. So like when somebody comes in to rent a unit, you know sell on things that like your products or service, your customer service all this those things and not on price. And as long as they can do that then growth will continue.

GM: What do you mean?

ES: So like if you would come into my self storage facility to rent a unit and as a self storage manager, if I said to you right away “Grace, you can rent this unit for free for the first three months” and you didn't even mention anything about price, then it’s like giving away the farm because don't you know, what I should be saying to you is “I have a great product, here all my features. What will it take you to know to rent? And actually offer you a unit at the current Street rates” and not just like automatically go into a discount or a concession to get you to rent that. That's what I mean by that ,like competing on your features and customer service and not on price alone. It affects everyone in that market because if you’re doing it then the next person has to do that in order to compete. 
And the next person and it's a slippery slope. 

GM: And when tell people that you write about this business. Are there any questions that people tend to ask that I haven't asked yet? 

ES: Usually they're just surprised at the depths of the industry. You know that it has its own trade magazine and that I write for it. But one person, one time I was at Home Depot asked me like about like the Silence of the Lambs. Have you seen the movie Silence of the Lamb? (Laughs)

GM: yeah, with Jodie foster? (Laughs)

ES: Yeah, you know how they go into a storage unit and there is a vehicle and there's like body parts in it and theyre like “does that actually happen?” and I'm like, “yeah, does.” Not often 
But it happens, and then there like “woah, that’s weird!” And I’m like “well , you can't inspect every single person's items that they store. You don’t always know what they're storing. I mean you give as a property manager, you you give them like a list of things that they should and shouldn't be storing. You don’t stand there and inventory their stuff, so you don’t always know what they’re storing. And so yeah, sometimes things like that do happen. There was a doctor who lost his medical license a few years back and was actually storing like body parts in like styrofoam containers. They found all this stuff in his unit. 

GM: That’s crazy! 

ES: So stuff like that actually does happen but not often. 

GM: How did you get into writing about this industry?

ES: I originally started with the company that I work for that is called minico publishing. I originally started as their circulation coordinator. And then after I started, the associate editor took a different job at a different publication and because I have a journalism background I asked if I could apply for the position and they took me on as the, I got promoted as to associate editor. Yeah, and then then later I was promoted to editor.

GM: That's great! This has been so helpful. Thank you so much. Im still trying to wrap my head around it. 

ES: There a lot. 

GM: i just want to make understand it right. I'm still kind of trying to figure out if I'm going to explore the data of part of it. In terms of seeing comparing in terms of square footage or in terms of consumer rates, like how consumer rates have been going up or the other part that I find interesting is that like a lot of the self storage units are buying a former brick-and-mortar stores like Sears. Which is interesting in a way because they used to be filled with stuff and now they’re being filled with somewhat what you can assume some what similar stuff. So just like people are consuming things differently now, but they are still consuming a lot.

ES: I would say, because they're public companies the real estate investment trust, you’ll be able to find a lot more data on them than any other kind of owner or operator in the industry.
If you look at the actual websites. You'll be able to find like investor relations information. They have to report on everything every quarter. So just a heads up, that’s their resource for information. Their website will have reports and stuff about earning and everything that their company does.
Because they have to because they investors in stock, you know, and they are part of the stock exchange and everything.
So there if you need information to back up what you're trying to say or you know prove otherwise, look at their websites, if you need individualized information. Like public storage, extra space, CubeSmart life storage and National Storage Associates. All of their websites will have data. About their growth anyways, or non-growth (laughs). Sometimes they have decline but...And I can send you some of those charts I talked to you. 

GM: That would be amazing. 

ES: I can make some PDFs and email those to you. 

GM: thank you so much!!

ES: If you think of anything like while you're working on this stuff, doesn't seem clear. Feel free to call me. If you need me to clarify anything, feel free to contact me. 
I with you all the best with this project and it was very nice talking to you. 

GM: Same, thank you so much Erica! Bye! 

ES: Bye!
